## Setting Up MongoDB Connection
[Home documentation](docs/README.md)

To successfully connect your Dart application to a MongoDB database, you need to configure several settings in your `.env` file. Below are the necessary configurations and their explanations:

### 1. `.env` File Configuration

Add the following entries to your `.env` file:

```plaintext
# MONGO DATABASE Configuration
MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=db_username
MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=db_password
MONGO_CONNECTION=mongo
MONGO_PORT=27017
NODE_ENV=production
MONGO_INITDB_DATABASE=db_database_name
```

#### Explanation of Each Setting:

- **MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME**:
  - **Description**: The root username for your MongoDB instance. This is the username used to authenticate and access the MongoDB database.
  - **Example**: `db_username`
  
- **MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD**:
  - **Description**: The root password associated with the MongoDB root username. This password, along with the username, is required to connect to the database.
  - **Example**: `db_password`
  
- **MONGO_CONNECTION**:
  - **Description**: The hostname or IP address where your MongoDB instance is running. This could be `localhost` if the database is running locally, or `mongo` if it’s running in a Docker container linked to your application.
  - **Example**: `mongo`
  
- **MONGO_PORT**:
  - **Description**: The port number on which your MongoDB instance is listening. By default, MongoDB listens on port `27017`.
  - **Example**: `27017`
  
- **NODE_ENV**:
  - **Description**: The environment in which your application is running. Common values are `development`, `production`, and `test`.
  - **Example**: `production`
  
- **MONGO_INITDB_DATABASE**:
  - **Description**: The name of the initial database to use when connecting to MongoDB. This is the database that your application will interact with.
  - **Example**: `db_database_name`

### 2. Enabling Database Configuration in Your Dart Application

To enable MongoDB configuration in your Dart application, you need to modify the `WaConfigs` object in your code. Specifically, you should set the `enable` property of `dbConfig` to `true`. This will activate the MongoDB connection using the settings specified in the `.env` file.

#### Code Example:

```dart
WaConfigs configs = WaConfigs(
  widgetsPath: pathTo("./example/widgets"),
  widgetsType: 'j2.html',
  languagePath: pathTo('./example/languages'),
  port: 8085,
  dbConfig: WaDBConfig(enable: true), // Set to true to enable MongoDB connection
  publicDir: pathTo('./example/public'),
);
```

## Configuring MongoDB Connection Without Using `.env` File

If you prefer to configure your MongoDB connection directly in your Dart code without relying on a `.env` file, you can do so by specifying the necessary database connection details directly within the `WaConfigs` object.

### Code Example:

```dart
WaConfigs configs = WaConfigs(
  widgetsPath: pathTo("./example/widgets"),
  widgetsType: 'j2.html',
  languagePath: pathTo('./example/languages'),
  port: 8085,
  dbConfig: WaDBConfig(
    user: 'db_username',
    pass: 'w5f7ewefwefuweif24',
    host: 'example.com',
    port: '27017',
    dbName: 'database_name',
    auth: 'admin', // Authenticator
    enable: true,
  ), 
  publicDir: pathTo('./example/public'),
);
```

### Explanation of Each Parameter:

- **user**: 
  - **Description**: The username used to authenticate with the MongoDB database.
  - **Example**: `'db_username'`
  
- **pass**:
  - **Description**: The password associated with the username. This is used to securely authenticate your connection to the database.
  - **Example**: `'w5f7ewefwefuweif24'`
  
- **host**:
  - **Description**: The hostname or IP address where your MongoDB instance is hosted. This could be an external domain, a local IP address, or `localhost` if running locally.
  - **Example**: `'example.com'`
  
- **port**:
  - **Description**: The port number on which MongoDB is listening. Typically, MongoDB runs on port `27017`.
  - **Example**: `'27017'`
  
- **dbName**:
  - **Description**: The name of the database to connect to within MongoDB.
  - **Example**: `'database_name'`
  
- **auth**:
  - **Description**: Specifies the authentication mechanism to be used. This is often set to `'admin'`, indicating that the authentication is performed using the admin database.
  - **Example**: `'admin'`
  
- **enable**:
  - **Description**: A boolean flag that enables or disables the MongoDB connection. Set this to `true` to activate the connection.
  - **Example**: `true`

### Summary

By following the steps above, you configure your application to connect to a MongoDB database using the credentials and connection details specified in the `.env` file. Remember to set `dbConfig` to `true` in your `WaConfigs` to ensure that your application attempts to connect to the MongoDB instance.